From Hansel minutes.com it's Hansel
minutes, a weekly discussion with
web developer and technologist Scott
Hanselman hosted by Carl Franklin that's
Ryan announcing show number 90
recorded live Wednesday, November seven,
2007. Support for a minutes
is provided by tolerant, rad
controls, most comprehensive suite of
proponents for windows for asp.net
web applications. Online at www
dot  dot com. Support
is also provided by dotnet
developers journal. The world's leading.net
developer magazine online at www
dot  dot com. In
this episode, Scott talks with
author and software architect, Dan
Appleman. This is Scott Hanselman,
and this is another episode
of Hansel minutes. We're sitting
here in the Mandalay Bay
resort and casino with the
legendary Dan Appleman. How are
you today, sir? I'm feeling
particularly legendary today. Fantastic. Fantastic.
It must be difficult to
walk around as a living
legend. Well, how would our
listeners know you? What are
some of your greatest hits?
My greatest hits? Well, I
go back to the old
visual basic days in the
component world wrote a number
of books. One of them
is the wind 32 guide
the visual basic programmers guide
to the wind 30 to
API. And that was a
big hit, also moving to
vb.net. And I'm also a
cofounder of a press publishing
company. And currently one of
my big projects is I'm
the webmaster of search.net.com, which
is a custom search engine
for.net developers. Ah, very cool.
So this is filtering content.
So then when you search
for it, you're only getting
the best editor approved.net content,
right? It's a, it's a
custom search engine specifically for
dotnet content and the differences
are, are really incredible in
terms of what you can
get. For example, one of
the sessions I did today
discussed failed software projects, and
one of the people comes
up and he asks, well,
how would I find out
some more case histories? And
I say, well, you know,
you can search for failed
software projects, but if you
search on search.net.com, you'll actually
get.net failed software projects and
you'll get information having to
do with, I think he
was also interested in performance.
How would you do performance
analysis and so on and
say, well, you would get
dotnet specific performance because we
search all the, the dev
sites and the MVP sites
and, and expert sites. Chances
are, you're going to get
some pretty good information on
the first page or two.
So it sounds like you
have a pretty extensive white
list of sites. That's specifically
only search within this domain
of the sub domain. It's,
it's reasonably extensive. It's less
so than you'd think because
a lot of the sites
you find are really aggregators
of other sites. And I
try to stay away from
that because if you, if
you search across all the
aggregators, you end up getting
the same hit 20 different
times, which doesn't really do
you much good. So if
you really look at the
people who are generating the
original content, that's not quite
as many as you as
you'd think, but that's a
fair amount. And how would
this compare to something like
Google blog search? I mean,
certainly I feel like the
most compelling content is sitting
on blogs. Are you picking
blogs on a one by
one basis or are you
saying like, I want all
of a weblogs.asp.net? Both. Both.
So I'll, I'll go to
weblogs that ASP and then
I'll go to the, the
Microsoft dev blogs, MSDN blogs,
but I will absolutely get
individual sites and VP sites
and so on. I think
your site's on there too.
Five. Very good search.net. Yeah.
Search  dot com one
word. Cool. Now, do you
do any consulting these days?
I mean, are you an
independent? I, I do a
fair amount of consulting say
half and half. I really
almost do it for fun
just to sort of keep
my eye on it. And
I do a lot of
it because my sister has
become a really amazing web
architect. She's, she's one of
those people who will go
into a company and give
them the website that they
actually need, not the one
they're asking for. And, and
those are really two very
different things, you know, she
can come in and she
will find out about their
business. She'll find out about
their brand if necessary, help
them develop the brand. And
then only after she's really
figured out what they're trying
to accomplish. Will she actually
go ahead and tell them,
you know, adjust what they
wanted to, what is really
going to work for them?
And I do a lot
of her backend work. So
I'm the software architect to
actually design and implement some
of the solutions he comes
up with. So you're acting
as a single architect, kind
of a, a one person,
one architect shop. What kind
of challenges are there as
opposed to being a team
of architecture, the member of
a larger enterprise architecture group?
Well, that, that actually was
the subject of this morning's
talk because one of the
things I came to realize
is that a lot of
the talk about software architecture
is focused towards the enterprise,
right? And you think about
teams of software developers, and
you think about the software
architect, whose job it is
to manage the developers and
create the specifications and develop
the requirements and all of
that. And that's great if
it's an enterprise and they
know what a software architect
is, they have the money
for software architect and they
get it. And admittedly, even
a lot of the large
company projects fail, but, but
still at least we sort
of know what they need,
but what about the small
businesses? What about the small
organizations, the one person shop
or the small business or
the startup company where they're
busy focusing on the product,
they need a website right
away. They don't have the
resources to do it. Who's
going to do it for
them. What about even larger
companies where the product team
is again, developing the product
and the website or an
it project comes to the
one poor marketing person or,
or, you know, it manager
who suddenly has to have
something that's really a small
business. And what they'll do
is they'll go out and
hire a consultant and they'll
get garbage. And one of
the main reasons they get
garbage is because they're asking
for garbage, they don't have
a software architect. They don't
know what to ask for.
So part of my message
is to help the small
shops, the individual developers, people
who are brought into develop
a solution to realize they
need to do the architecture
as well. They need to
be software architects as well.
So let me see if
I can understand it kind
of paraphrasing. You're saying that
in that, in a smaller
organization, when you don't have
all that support structure that
a larger enterprise architecture organization
would have that the general
responsibility as an architect start
to kind of bleed into
the roles of the other
members of that smaller team.
And everyone has to kind
of take up that architectural.
Sometimes the small team has
one person or two people.
And one of the things
that I see over and
over again is that a
company will go and they'll
go out and try to
get something done. They need
a solution. And the project
is a disaster. I mean,
they are taken advantage of
it's, it's shocking the degree.
So what are the root
causes of that? I mean,
break it down to the
what, why does, why do
we see that so often?
Why is it so easy
to have that happen? The
fewer people are involved, you
would think with fewer people,
the communication will be better.
You would think so. But
one of the studies I
looked at a KPMG study
showed that by their definition,
about 60% of small projects,
any project under 12 months,
they describe fails. It's either
way over budget or way
past deadline, or just doesn't
meet the requirements. And there
are a number of reasons
for it. One is there
are some consultants who frankly
are unethical. They are not
thinking about the best interest
of the company. You know,
they'll find out what, what's
your budget for it? Oh,
$50,000. Okay. We can spend
$50,000. Right? You see that
it's terrible. And one of
the points in my session
is that a software developer
has an ethical responsibility towards
the client. You know, our
job is to act in
the best interest of the
client. And I think a
lot of people don't do
that. Another thing that happens
is that, and this is
pretty common. The software developer
gives the customer. What they
ask for problem is that
the customer doesn't know what
they want. Yeah. I was
talking to a guy about
this earlier. One of my
bosses used to say that
a customer walks in and
he says, this cell phone
needs a bigger antenna. And
then ultimately you have to
dig into the issue of
does this person wants better
cell phone reception. They may
have come in with their
proposed solution, which may very
well be a larger antenna,
but it could be any
one of another dozen different,
different issues. So often the
customer will come with a
solution, Right. And their solutions
wrong. One, one example that
I saw as again, this
was a website, the customer
said, I want a CMS.
I want a content management
solution say, okay, well, why
we want to be able
to edit the site? Okay.
Well, that's reasonable. Tell us
about the site. How often
does it change? Oh, well,
it's not really going to
change, you know, occasionally it
might change say, okay, who's
going to be doing this
content. Well, I don't really
know. Who's, who's going to
be making the changes. And
after talking and finding out,
we came to realize that
they didn't want a CMS
system at all. They wanted
to site, they could have
re occasionally changed. So we
ended up putting them on
a static HTML site and
hooking them up with contributes
so that they could hire
a high school student to
go ahead and edit those
occasional things Needed to, but
of course, no, no, no
customer would come and say,
I want a static HTML
site. That would never be
the solution that they would
propose. Even though that may
be the one that they
truly needed. Sure. Because they
thought they'd heard that a
CMS system is what allows
you to edit your site
and handle exactly. But, but
by doing that, by keeping
them on a static HTML
site, we take them a
solution that's incredibly secure, very
stable, excellent performance can be
edited to suit their needs.
It doesn't have to be
updated with periodic security patches.
It was exactly. And we
saved them a ton of
money. Yeah. But not only
immediately in the short term,
but in the long run,
Presumably pass that savings on
to them, of course, as
opposed to doing a fixed
bid and keeping it off
yourself. Of course. I mean,
I, I, I have an
advantage because consulting is a
sideline for me. Oh yeah.
So I don't need the
work. So I have a
real freedom in terms of
really trying to save the
customer money. And, and that's
what I enjoy doing. I
like to find a solution
that really is reliable, stable,
inexpensive, all those good things.
I think that's a real
challenge though, for the independent
consultant who, who does need
the money. You know, if
you need to hit the
mortgage that month and you
also need to be ethical
and provide the best possible
experience for the client. One
of the discussions I was
having yesterday at dinner was
a gentleman said, well, what
if you spend many, many
years building up your consultancy
as a single individual building
frameworks, and those frameworks enable
you to deliver things faster
and faster and faster, maybe
you're billing out at a
a hundred dollars an hour,
but you, you realize that
a particular client could make
great use of your framework.
And that might save them
the equivalent of 40 hours,
80 hours. Do you bill
for what you would call
value, added billing, which is
hours not done, but hours
that they would have had
to have paid because you
created this framework. Do you
raise your hourly rate or
do you simply pass the
savings on to them and
say that this is why
you should continue to do
business with me? Well, What
I personally do in cases
like that is, is, you
know, again, my background is
that of a component vendor.
So I componentize it. So
there are a number of
pieces that are yes. And,
and you know, we're going
to charge you the hourly
rate and $150 for this
component. So the formalization of
that framework, rather than simply
having a, a collection of,
of utilities and base classes
that you've got and have
in your pocket, draw a
dotted line around those and
drop, drop a licensing agreement,
give it a name and
say, this is the component
we're going to license you.
Absolutely. So everybody wins. The
customer gets the benefit of
the amortized price of the
component. The fact that you're
able to reuse it, you
get to sell a product,
not just time, it's a
win, win situation for everybody.
And it's perfectly ethical. Cause
it's all above board. I
wonder if that would be
harder. I would think with
these micro ISV is, cause
it seems like a lot
of one man or one
woman consultancy shops also have
a microwave ISV kind of
event. And you're, you have
a certain split brain issue
where you're trying to act
as a consultant, but you'd
really like to get these
other, these other electrons out
for sale because electrons are
cheaper to sell and molecules,
you know? Well, Have you
read by any chance the
world is flat? Yeah, I
have actually. So really what
we're talking about is what
you described a micro ISV.
It's how do you stay
relevant and how do you
stay effective as a consultant
in a world where you're
competing against render coder? You
know, these guys in Bangalore
who will do things for
a hundred bucks. And the
value that we provide is
not in the coding. It
is really in the software
architecture. It is in the
ability to really talk to
the customer, find out what
they really need, give them
an effective solution. That's something
that's really, really hard to
do from Bangalore, right? And
that's the advantage we have.
And Of course, some of
our listeners of course, listening
to this in Bangalore, That's
fine. So you know what?
This is what you need
to do. Componentize your solutions,
component Size your solutions and,
and feel comfortable, really finding
out what your customer needs.
If you can find out,
if you can solve the
customer's problem, save the money
you will make up in
referrals more than what you
would lose in the one
project. Well, that's interesting. I
just had this phrase popped
into my head architecting for
referrals is just thinking that
as a software architect, there's
so many competing things that
you need to balance, right?
I mean the job of
an architect, a software architect
is definitely one of juggling.
When you look at you
say, what is a software
architect through? And I looked
at some of the definitions
and what it really comes
down to is, is we're
the people who prevent projects
from failing. I mean, that's
the job of a software
architect cause so many projects
do fail. In fact, if
you compare software architecture to
other kinds of architecture and
we were here in Mandalay
Bay, and I got to
tell you if the construction,
the building architects had the
same track record as software
architects, I would not feel
comfortable in the 16th floor
of this hotel. And I
was like, there's a 20%
chance of what? So, you
know, we're talking about preventing
things from failing. Well, why
do software projects fail? It's
not the technology. It's not
the coding software projects fail
because of people issue issues.
They failed because of failure
to get good requirements and
or to get the incorrect
requirements. They are inadequate of
the software developers. It's poor
design. These are what cause
software projects fail, poor management.
You bring up, do you
bring up design? And I
have noticed a lot of
people and I've been guilty
of this, myself using the
word architecture and design interchangeable.
Wait, no design is part
of architecture. Okay. A subset,
it's a subset, a software
architects concerned with the entire
software life cycle. And we're
trying to come up with
a solution. First of all,
we have to define what
are the requirements? What does
the customer really truly need?
Okay. Then what are the
designs? What are the approaches
that the architectures, if you
will, for solving that problem,
then there's the actual specifications
actually formalizing W when you're
doing a small project, how
do you like to do
your specifications? I understand that
a lot of people who
do one man, two man
shops like to do like,
you know, the code is
the spec or the test
or the spec. They use
specifications like end spec. Our
spec sometimes I'll use screenshots.
They'll point at that and
say, well, that mockup is
the spec is the spec
pros. As far as you're
concerned, I like pros. I'm
a writer. So for me,
the spec is pros the
two big parts of the
spec, there's the feature list.
And that might include, you
know, some graphics and so
on. It might be just
a bulleted list in plain
English, right? Or whatever language
you're voting in. Something that
the user can actually understand.
It sounds like user stories
that people would say in
the agile community You're getting
right. Then there's the non
feature list. These are things
you're not getting. And that's
more important. The negative space.
Yes. Because when the customer
who isn't going to read
the spec anyway, is barely
going to understand it. They
sort of assume they've told
you what they want. So
they're going to assume that
it's in the feature list,
but when you say here's
what you're not getting, they
might actually pay attention to
that. And it might cause
them to step back and
say, Oh, hold on a
minute. I want that. Or
I need that. What would
it cost me? It also
is sort of good in
terms of, of, of covering
your yourself in terms of
when they come back later
and say, here's why isn't
this here. Say, look, it's
in the list of things
that I wasn't going to
do. Right? It's the list
of things that you can't
have unless you spend more
money. Right? So the, the
non feature list, and, and
this is, this is it's
good from a design perspective,
because you're also thinking when
you get around to designing,
it's like, okay, where are
my limitations? What doors am
I closing in design things
that are going to become
very hard to do later
because of a design decision
I make now, That's very
interesting. I think that from
my point of view, that
there's a big difference. There's
an explicit difference between simply
the list of stuff you're
not getting versus the things
that this design And that
is the critical part because
when you preclude something, it
becomes really, really expensive to
add it later. So you
want to, you want to
get a handle on that
as a software architect, because
now is the time when
you have to consider the
future as a software architect,
you want to consider not
just what they want. Now
you want to consider anything
they might ever possibly want,
because now's the cheapest time
to put those hooks in,
to make it possible, to
make the architecture enable that.
Right. So I'm really big
on asking the customer question,
are you ever, ever in
your wildest dreams going to
want this? Exactly. This is
a load bearing wall. Yes.
And if we knock it
down, it's going to cause
the stabilization, the entire structure.
Yes. So, so my specs
include a fair amount of,
of, you know, if you're
ever going to want this,
it's going to cost you
this much to make it
possible someday later. Certainly. Yeah.
It certainly costs money to
I'm mixing my metaphors now,
but sometimes the customer wants
to have their finger on
the chest piece before they
make that move. And they
just won't take their finger
off the piece and commit
to that move. Well, I
just don't know that I
might want that. And then
you get into, you know,
risk mitigation. It's like, what,
how risky is it if
we take this, this direction
or that, And, and that's
what a lot of the
spec is. It's, you know,
what are the risks? What
are the approaches? What are
the trade offs? You know,
you can go this way.
You can go this way.
That's that software architecture, the
coding's the easiest part that,
you know, I don't even
do a lot of the
coding. I'll find other people
to do coding, Right? In
that context, the coding is
the transcription, right? If you
have correctly taking their business
need and written it into
a spec, then coding is
just the transcription of that,
Right? We're also very concerned
about longterm maintenance support. What
are they going to do
when you leave? Right. One
horror story. I actually saw
this. I was looking at
Rent-A-Car cause I wanted to
get familiar with it. This
was somebody was requesting a
job to unzip a file.
It seems like all of
their source code had been
built by this consultant. And
they had zipped up the
source code. They password protected
it and they'd left, Oh
no, Oh no source control
for them. Right. And they
didn't have any access to
the code. And, and of
course, nowadays, depending on which
the technology you use, some
of them are really very,
very secure. And I have
total sympathy and, and I'm
actually the tragedy is that
the lack of ethics on
the part of the software
developer, who didn't make it,
you know, give them the
product they bought basically. And
it's tragic when that happens.
I've seen a number of
cases where that happens and
it's unacceptable Because ultimately that
individual didn't know what they
were receiving and they may
not have been, they may
not have been educated enough
to know that they did
in fact, need that code.
It could be, but the
software developers responsibilities to make,
I mean, we have a
responsibility to make sure that
somebody can follow us and
support the code. Yeah. That's
actually, that's actually true and
open source projects as well.
We had an interesting discussion
this morning and the open
source panel at about eight
this morning. And the comment
came up that, well, what
if the entire project team
is hit by a bus
or, you know, we're unable
to get something to get
help, to get support on
this because it's old. And
we all kind of refer
to that kind of canonical
project that we've all stumbled
upon on the net. That
looks really interesting, but you
know, it hasn't been updated
since 2003 and that was
like 50 years ago and
I don't really feel comfortable.
And then when you unzip
it and you can't say
with some projects, you can't
just say build dot bat.
You know what I'm saying?
Right. I I've worked at
companies where we've put source
code into escrow and, you
know, to protect the, the
client. But ultimately we all
knew that there was no
way that they would ever,
they would ever be able
to get the kind of
Rube Goldberg and build system
that we had put together
in order to make this
thing build. So while it
gave them comfort that this
source was an escrow, certainly
they weren't enabled to actually
do anything about it. It's
actually funny because that's where
with our software company, one
of the things we did
was a large portion of
our code. We didn't make
it open source, but we
opened the source. We made
the source code available to
our customers. So it's not
like open source, open source
source, open source opened. And
the reason we did that
is we wanted to make
sure that all of our
customers, even though we've been
around for since, since 91,
which is an eternity and
we still will support and
ship stuff from back now.
Really. Wow. Yeah. I mean,
it's quite a statement. Well,
we believe that software life
cycles are as long as
the customer needs them, but
we also realize that that
can't go on forever. So
we opened up the source
and one of the projects
we had was, okay, let's
make sure this can be
built. And you know, one
of the techniques that we
make sure we can build
our own software is that
we don't upgrade machines. We
replace machines. So I have
literally a rack of machines
that are built systems for
old software. Wow. So we
can go back and rebuild
stuff. Now, of course that's
much better because you have
virtual machines. Yeah. I actually
have a windows 98 virtual
machine that I use to
sync my Newton because I
couldn't get my Newton to
work in 64 of it.
Vista don't know why I
seemed like a reasonable scenario.
Our accounting software runs on
windows, Emmy inside of a
VM inside of a VM.
Fantastic. Right. So, so virtual
machines really go a long
way to solving that particular
problem for which I'm incredibly
grateful. Yeah. That's good. I
think that's a great idea.
I think of the metaphor
of a, if you've got
a classic car in the
garage, you really need to
make sure that that car
gets turned on every couple
of months. And I liked
the idea of the formalization
of that. Let's just make
sure we build everything, you
know, a couple of times
a year to make sure
that something hasn't rotted, Right.
The real problem with building
our old stuff, you know,
for someone getting our sources,
actually not going to be
our code, it's going to
be that they're going to
have to get a copy
of, you know, visual basic
3.0 or visual C plus
plus 5.1 or whatever version
was the fixed bill version.
Because, you know, when we
upgrade to newer versions of
the software, the new version
gets built on the latest
C plus plus, but we
don't go ahead and back
build old versions. I mean,
that would be a lot
of time for no purpose.
Right. Do you have any
formalization? This is a little
bit off topic, but I
just thinking about configuration management,
cause you're talking about how
the architect's job is the
entire life cycle of the
software. And I, a friend
of mine, Adam Kogan had
an application that he shipped.
And when you go to
the help about menu, he
actually shipped end unit the
gooey with his application so
that you could run all
of his unit tests on
the client machine. And some
people thought this was madness.
And I thought this was
just about the coolest thing
ever. And he would basically
let the user run a
complete suite of unit tests,
the same one he runs
and then send the results
to them in order to
see the, how of the
health of this. And it
was kind of a, it
was kind of a clever
poor man's configuration management system.
And then they ended up
building that into a larger
diagnostic tool, such that if
at any client is having
trouble with their machine, you
download this thing, check the
status quo and kind of
upload it to them in
order to see if the
version numbers, Of course, you're
talking about a completely different
subject, which is instrumenting software
for most systems. And, you
know, nowadays for all of
our debt.net development, we instrument
the application. So it's full
of trace, trace sources and
so on, and you can
turn them on and off
using config file and dump
tons of information and capture
it and have them send
it to you. So yes,
writing software instruments. Yeah, I
guess that was a little
bit of a tangent, but
I was just thinking that
those are the kinds of
things that I've seen. It's
funny, I've seen more of
those kinds of techniques in
one and two man software
shops than in large enterprises.
Well, you know, there's a
lot to be said for
the one and two man
software shop. When you yourself
mentioned it earlier, it does
cut down the communication costs.
You don't necessarily have to
create a complex formal specification
because you're not splitting up
the work among the dozen
developers. And the fact of
the matter is that you
wouldn't want to do a
complex formal specification for a
small project that have the
scale anyway, because nobody's ever
going to read it. I
mean, they don't read the
documentation anyway. They don't read
the specifications anyway, it's For
when they don't get what
they want, they refer back
to it to make sure
because they think of the,
I think the most average
business person thinks of a
software specification as being a
pretty clear contract, pretty clear
a clear relationship between the
architect and them. Right? One
of the things that, that
I do that I don't
know how common this is,
but I think it's really
important is we'll often do
a proposal to do the
proposal. I've seen a lot
of proposals, you know, people
go on and say, we
need this and see the
proposals come back. And, and
most of them are garbage.
And the reason they're garbage
is because in order to
really quote a project in
order to do a proper
proposal, you really have to
have a lot of the
design and requirements already done.
Otherwise you're just guessing. So
you're, it sounds to me
like you're pretty clear to
charge them for that. Even
if you don't end up
doing the final work, If
it's substantial. Yeah, absolutely. So
w we'll come in and
we'll, we'll do, we'll find
out your requirements, we'll find
out your current status. We'll
figure out what you need.
We'll come up with not
a full software specification, but
at least a general architecture
recommendations of technologies do you
use and so on. And
then, you know, we can
build it for you or
you can get it. Sometimes
we don't even want to
build it. Let's say I'm
not a consulting firm. That's
true. I mean, how often
have you done that? Have
you gone in beginning of
the, you know, step zero,
the request for proposal and
then said after an appropriate
vetting, you know, I don't
think I'm interested in this
business. Sometimes I'll go. And
even from the beginning, I
say, this is not the
kind of job that I'll
do, but I know what
you need done. We'll go
ahead. We'll do the requirements.
We'll do the, give you
a direction and we'll even
help you review the proposals
and help you choose someone.
I think that's a really
valuable skill that the average
individual can consultant out there
for those who think that
they are a, a, a
coder could be, you know,
begin to get an understanding
of architecture and open up
a whole new practice, a
whole new potential source of
revenue, acting as an architect,
as a bridge between the
business and the technical. Well,
here's the interesting thing about
it. It's not rocket science.
I mean, you don't have
to go to architecture school
to do this right. The
way the software architectures of
software architects act you'd think
that it was a kind
of a mystery. No, it's
really not. It's really more
of a choice. It's a
willingness to look at this
stuff. The problem is a
lot of coders. Aren't interested.
They say, tell me what
to do and I'll build
it right. And what it
takes is a certain mindset.
It's just the decision to
say, you know, I want
to come up with the
right solution for this customer.
And I will look at
everything and talk to anyone
to come up with that
right. Solution, I guess once
you've built enough software, you're
ready to go ahead and
try that. And certainly once
you've seen enough nightmares, and
that's how I think software
architects learn at this level
is you look at horror
stories and you figure out
and you see what's gone
wrong. And you say, I
can do that. I can
talk to people. I can
ask questions. It's a choice.
It's not about a science.
Well, Dan, I really appreciate
you taking the time out
of your busy schedule here
at dev connections with the
Mandalay Bay. And this has
been another episode of Hansel
minutes. We'll see you again
next week.